After a year in England, for the working out and publication of the
survey at the pyramids, described in the last chapter, I undertook to
excavate for the Egypt Exploration Fund. And as great things were then
expected from Tanis, and a special fund of £1000 was in course of being
raised for its clearance, the most desirable course was to ascertain
what prospects really existed there. A preliminary exploring trip was
made to several places in the Delta, in course of which I discovered
Naukratis; and as soon as the marshes had somewhat dried I went in
February to Tanis. It is an out-of-the-way place, inaccessible except by
water during some months, twenty miles from a post or station; on three
sides the marshy plains stretch away to the horizon, only a little
cultivation existing on the south. When I arrived the mounds were almost
impassable for the mud, and continual storms threatened my tent. But
gradually I built a house on the top of the mounds, and from thence
looked down over the work on one side, and over the village on the
other.


Tanis is a great ring of mounds, around the wide plain in which lie the
temple ruins. And the first day I went over it I saw that the temple
site was worked out; the limits of the ruins had been reached, and no
more statues or buildings should be hoped for, by the side of what was
already known. But such were the large expectations about the site, that
I had to prove the case, by a great amount of fruitless trenching in all
directions. The only monuments that we unearthed were far out of the
temple, in a Ptolemaic shrine; this contained a fine stele of Ptolemy II
and Arsinoe, which was entirely gilt when discovered, and two or three
other steles, the recess containing the large stele being flanked by two
sphinxes. The main stele and sphinxes are now in the British Museum.


But though digging was not productive in the temple, yet I found two
important monuments which had been exposed by Mariette’s excavators, and
yet were never noticed by himself, De Rougé, or others who studied the
remains. One was a part of an obelisk of the thirteenth dynasty, with an
inscription of a king’s son, Nehesi, perhaps the son of the king
Nehesi-Ra. The other was the upper part of the well-known stele of
Tirhaka: this I found lying face up; and on searching every block of the
same quality for the remainder of it, I turned up the lower half, which
Mariette had hidden; thus the unknown led me to the known.